Qs
why does acetylation of histones loosen up wound DNA?
why are we only looking at H3 and H4?
-> most studied and acetylation at H3 and H4 is more correlated with chomatin compaction status compared to H2A and H2B
-> 
why are we looking at rna pol2?
why is it important to look at G0 and G1 cell states?


Four cell cycle stages - G1,S,G2,M under usual conditions
unfavourable conditions - G1 -> G0 transition (is reversible - cell can return back to G1 if favorable conditions)
For S pombe Nitrogen starvation for 24 hrs triggers the transition

Characteristics of G1 and G0 cells-
1. G0 cells are shorter
2. G0 cells are more thermotolerant
3. G0 cells have less mRNA and rRNA content suggesting repressed transcription

What is unknown about S pombe G0 state compared to G1:
- effect of histone PTMs/ marks
- RNA pol localization and abundance
- active transcription status
- nuclear macromolecular packing

Chromatin-
nucleosome with 147 bp of DNA wrapped around histone octamer
10 nm wide, 6 nm thick cylinder
most abundant macromolecular complex in the nucleus

- activating histone PTMs -> open chromatin -> exposed DNA
- repressing histone PTMs -> compact chromatin -> less exposed DNA

Canonical nucleosomes-
10-nm-wide, 6-nm-thick cylinders, and have 145–147 base pairs of DNA bent in 1.65 left-handed superhelical gyres around the histone octamer

Non-canonical nucleosomes-
have either partially detached DNA, partially detached histones, fewer than eight histones, or a combination of these features

in-vitro, reconstituted nucleosomes are mostly canonical
budding yeast nuclei -> canonical nucleosomes account for < 10%
human chromatin -> abundant and densely packed canonical nucleosomes both in I and M state

What is done?
characterise S pombe cell nuclei in multiple states-
1. G1 arrested cells
2. proliferating cells (G1)
3. G0 cells
4. G0 cells with hyperacetylated histones

Findings-
1. G0 histones can be made hyperacetylated -> affects nucleus shrinkage but does not affect thermotolerance or transcription repression
2. Hyper or hypocetylation does not affect large-scale nuclear macromolecular packing or abundance of nucleosomes
->
G0 transcriptional repression is robust to perturbations in histone acetylation and nuclear morphology
G0 transcriptional repression does not lead to a massive upregulation of canonical nucleosomes.

DAPI, or 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, is a fluorescent stain that binds strongly to adenine–thymine-rich regions in DNA.

figure 1 b
DIC, fleuorescence microscopy, spot test
- proliferating and G1 cells are longer than G0 cells

TSA inhibits histone deacetylase -> histone hyper acetylation (acetylation of lysines on histone proteins)
- TSA treated G0 cells show similar phenotype as G0 cells

figure 1 c
G0 and TSA-G0 cells are more thermoresistant

figure 2 a
Immunoblotting
- less acetylation at H3 Nterm in G0 cells
- similar acetylation at H4 Nterm in G0 cells
- TSA treatments leads to increase in acetylation greater than P or G1 cells
- TSA washout reverts acetylation back to G0 like







Discussion-
what was known -
In G0 state, S pombe cells become shorter, undergo transcription repression and become more thermotolerant
G0 vs G1 state comparison?
what else is different other than stated in the paper in these two states?

what was unknown -
changes in histone acetylation
Why is histone acetylation important?

abundance of macromolecules (polymerase subunit)
other macromolecules? extra-nuclear macromolecules

nucleus volume changes
distribution of nuclear macromolecular complexes
structural state of the nucleosomes

S pombe cell nuclei have lower active transcription in the G0 state than in the proliferative state
how did we conclude this?
lower 5-EU incorporation, lower RNA polymerase levels, lower levels of Rpb1 CTD-S2P and CTD-S5P markers -> consistent with transcriptional repression
how is it similar to mitotic cell state/ other extreme states?

Megacomplexes are rarer within G0 chromatin, but abundant in the nucleolus
Rpb1 is less in G0 cells but, whatever rpb1 is present the proportion of rpb1 partaking transcription is same as proliferating cells
(this is from CTD-S2P and CTD-S5P)

budding yeast -> large increase in transcriptional markers within minutes after G0 exit (hypertransciption)
fission yeast -> no increase in transcriptional markers, even hours after G0 exit (from RNA labeling and rpb1 CTD phospho sites)
re-entry to proliferative state-
budding yeast -> 4 hrs
fission yeast -> 6-7 hrs
why this difference , we don't know yet


acetylation
acetylation marks make chromatin more negatively charged
TSA treated G0 cells
-> hyperacetylated H3 but not H4, longer cell bodies, larger nuclei
-> but, no decrease in thermotolerance or derepression of transcription

similar macromolecular crowding in G0 and TSA-G0 cells -> larger nuclear volume in TSA-G0 is due to unknown additional complexes (other than RNA pol)

Changes in histone-acetylation therefore does not lead to predictable phenotype differences in cells with repressed transcription.